Good afternoon, everyone.
Please welcome, from Apple Computer,
Manager of Text Input and Fonts,
Giulia Pagallo.
Welcome to session 425.
I hope you guys are having an
excellent conference this year.
When we were putting
the session together,
we were wondering what percentage of the
developers attending the session would be
new to the area of Carbon Text and what
percentage would be returning developers.
So let me start by asking,
how many are new to this area?
Any?
Anybody?
All right.
Good.
How many of you are already using some
of the Carbon Text APIs for Mac OS X?
Excellent.
We have a session that is packed
with information for both you,
the new developers,
so that you can quickly
orient yourself in this area,
and for you,
the developers who have been using
our APIs release after release.
In particular,
I'm going to start by giving
you an overview of the
Carbon Text API landscape.
And I'm going to talk about
the APIs for static text,
as well as the APIs for editable text.
After that,
I'm going to turn my attention
to the HITextView APIs,
and the MLT APIs for editable text.
And then I'm going to turn the
presentation to Tom Madden,
one of the engineers in the ATSUI team.
And he's going to talk
to you about ATSUI,
which are the APIs you
use for laying out text.
So say that a lot of the applications
have a need for static text,
either for your labels and your controls,
for your text and your dialogues,
or some bits and pieces
in general of text.
And for static text,
there are basically four components
that play a key role in this area.
So at the bottom of my diagram is Quartz,
the Apple 2D drawing engine,
which provides beautiful, crisp,
anti-aliased text on the screen.
A client of Quartz is at
SUI Apple Type Services for Unicode,
which is the component responsible
for positioning the glyphs
correctly on your documents.
And also breaking the
lines of text correctly.
Whatever language you
are using at the time,
whether it is Japanese, Chinese,
or Roman language,
at SUI does the right job.
The next level up is either
the Appearance Manager in the
high-level toolbox or the MLTE APIs,
which stands for
Multilingual Text Engine.
In 95% of the cases, 99% of the cases,
the API that you should use for
static text that we recommend
you use is the HITheme Text APIs.
However,
there are situations in which you
need control over rotated text,
in which you need control
over the graphic context,
or you need to use fonts other than
the ones the HI theme fonts provide.
In that case,
we recommend you look at the two
APIs that MLTE provides for static text.
Is that not enough?
You need additional control
for your static text?
Then you should look at the ATSUI APIs.
Tom is going to talk to you about them in
the second portion of this presentation.
The same components that play
a role for static text play
a role for editable text,
and you see them on the screen.
Now, let's say that you have a mail-like
application where you have some small
text fields on the top of your window,
say, for your recipient or
your subject of the email,
and some large text areas for
the content of your email.
Which APIs should you use?
So for the small text fields,
we recommend you use
the Unicode controls.
And those are being available
in the system since the
first version of Mac OS X.
For the large text area,
if you have an application
currently running Mac OS and
you are using the system APIs,
you're probably using MLT directly,
which is good.
However, we recommend that for Tiger and
beyond you transition to use the
HITextView APIs in conjunction with MLT.
And I'm gonna tell you why in a second.
But before I move on,
I also want to point out that if you
are developing your own text engine,
in that case,
you want to use the ATSUI APIs directly.
And again,
Tom is gonna talk to you about that.
In summary, if you have static text,
for most cases,
take a look at the HIT theme
text box APIs if you need
additional control over styles.
The graphic context,
you need to rotate your text.
Take a look at TXN draw CFString text
box API and those are in the MLT header.
And if you need additional control
over how your text is rendered,
please look at the
For edited text, for text fields,
as I said, use the Unicode Control,
and that the API that is on the
screen is the API create Unicode
Edit Text Control is the API you
call to create one such text field.
And for text areas, again,
for target and beyond,
we recommend you start using
HITextView in conjunction with MLTE.
Now, I'm hearing some of you
back in the room saying,
I have an application.
I'm using the MLT API for my text area.
They work beautifully.
Why should I move on and
transition to HITextView?
And here are six reasons.
And there will probably
be more in the future.
So if you attended the high-level toolbox
session during the conference this year,
you heard that the high-level
toolbox team is working hard,
has been working hard in modernizing the
Carbon toolbox and being transitioning
to a hierarchical view model.
If you use HITextView,
your text area will
belong to the hierarchy.
And the advantage of that is
that then internally we can take
We can use that information to optimize,
for instance,
the rendering of your objects.
In addition,
the order of the Carbon events
is well defined if your
text area is an HITextView.
Also, throughout the conference,
we've been pointing out the importance
of supporting accessibility so
that your application is available
to a wider set of customers.
If you use HITextView,
accessibility is built
in in your text area.
There is no work that you need to do in
order to make your text area accessible.
Compositing is also
supported in HITextView.
And in addition, it's very easy to create
an HITextView using the
tools that Apple provides.
And I'm going to show you
how to do that in a minute.
Last but not least,
if you have an HITextView,
the MLTE object is available to you so
that you can extract that object from the
HITextView and you can reuse all of that
code that you already have in customizing
your text area using the MLTE APIs.
Now, let me take a quick detour for
those of you who are new to the area
of Carbon Text and tell you what
are the advantages of using MLTE.
What does MLTE provide?
So, MLT is a full Unicode
layout and edited engine.
And what that does mean to you is that
your text area are gonna support all
of the languages the Mac OS X supports.
You don't need to worry about the
upgrades to the Unicode standard.
You don't need to worry about learning
about how bidirectional text works.
That is there for you.
In addition, because we leveraged at ZUI,
we have advanced typography.
I suggest you go and use the typography
panel in conjunction with MLT in Tiger to
see how you can take advantage of all
the rich features that we have in the
fonts to produce some beautiful text.
Of course, we have anti-alias text.
And MLT also provides built-in
support for multimedia,
which is important because
these days it's very rare the
document that contains text only.
Another advantage of MLTE APIs is
that they provide support for
the basic functionality without
requiring for you to write any code.
So, for instance, you get input,
text input, from any of the input
methods in the system,
whether they are character palettes,
keyboard layouts, input methods, ink,
they just work.
Selection, drag and drop are built in,
and we also added support
for the document access,
which are new Carbon events
that were introduced in Panther.
Now, if that is not enough,
if you need customization
for your text area,
MLTE provides a simple set of
APIs that allow you to customize
the text area to your needs.
And I'm going to show you
how to do that in a second.
But most important, I think,
MLT is an evolving and
growing set of APIs.
We've been listening to your feedback,
and we really thank you for that,
of what are the areas
that are important to you.
What are the areas where you need
new APIs to customize your text area?
And so, I like to think of the
improvement in MLT in two areas.
On the one hand, we have the improvement
that we do under the hood.
That's the work that we do at Apple,
so that your application provides richer
and richer behavior without you making
any changes whatsoever to your code.
And I'm going to give
you an example of that.
On the other hand,
we have new APIs based on your
feedback that allow you to customize
your application and deliver to your
customers the functionality they need.
So let's talk a little bit about
what we've been working on.
What are the areas where you
can see enhancements in MRT?
As there are more and more Carbon and
Cocoa applications in the system,
we think it's important that the users
get a consistent behavior as they switch
from one application to the other.
So we've been working closely
with the Cocoa team to
provide a consistent behavior.
This is work in progress,
but you can notice that there has
been some improvements in this area.
the customers are there are
more and more multilingual.
So we've been working on
improving the multilingual
experience in your text areas.
In particular,
I want to point out that we have added
support for Glyph Variants in Tiger,
so that for instance,
you can use the typography panel,
use one of the fonts that
has Glyph Variants built in,
and you can choose the glyph that
you want to represent your name.
This is for instance,
important to our Japanese users.
You can see on the second line on
my screen is three of the spellings
for the last name Watanabe.
The second character is different
in each of the ways they spell it,
and this is important to Japanese users.
In addition,
the Kotori team has been working
on improving the conversion
accuracy of their input method,
and the way they did that is by
leveraging some new Carbon events that
allow the input method to get access
to the context in your text area.
We added that support in MLTE so
that your text areas get better
conversion accuracy for Japanese.
At the feedback session yesterday,
we heard that it's important to many
of you improvements in Arabic support.
And I wanted to point out that
we've been working on improving
our bidirectional text in MLTE.
For instance, in Panther,
we improved how the character
moves at the boundaries
between Roman and Arabic text.
We're not there yet, we know,
but we are making progress.
Also, as Mac OS X evolves,
we've been involved in
the implementation of MLT.
You heard at the conference that
Quick Draw APIs have been deprecated.
We had removed that code path in MLT so
now that you get ATSUI and CG only.
In addition,
we transitioned our implementation to use
QuickTime importers so that now you have
a wider set of file formats that you can
import into your the Maltese text area.
And also we've been
working on performance.
Performance, performance,
performance was our mantra
during the Panther release.
And what I show you on the screen
is some of the results that we
have between improvements that
we have between 10.2 and 10.3.
For instance, reading in a text document,
the performance of that
operation is 400 times faster.
Scrolling text is 250 times faster.
And if you select all the text in
your document and change the style,
it's 160 times faster.
I want to point out that these
improvements are not only the result
of the effort of the MLTE team.
We work closely with the CG and
the ASUI folks and the rest
of the engineers at Apple.
So this is the result
of the combined effort.
The performance improvement that you have
in the current Tiger build are very much
comparable to the Panther GM results.
And, and we've been working on that.
So I do expect that by
the time we ship Tiger,
those numbers are going
to look even better.
That's old.
What's new?
What is new in Tiger?
So I'm very happy to announce that
we were able to implement all of the
commonly requested APIs in MLT for Tiger.
So let me start on that list.
First of all, we have undo groups.
And what an undo group is basically
is a sequence of actions that are
bracketed between a begin and an end
API so that you can give the illusion
to your users when they go and click
on the undo item that all of those
actions are undone as a single one.
And the reason why that is
important to some of you is because
some... There are situations
in which you want to initialize
your text object with some text,
change the style, add some pictures,
but then you want your user to undo
all of those operations as one.
Take a look at the APIs that
are in the headers.
There are also some related
APIs that are used so that you can
correctly handle the undo menu or let
MLTE handle the undo menu correctly.
Let's talk about scrolling.
By default, MLTE scrolls.
And some of you love it,
and some of you hate it.
And the reason why some of you don't
like that default behavior is because
it's not suited for your application.
So let's say that you have an
application that writes status results
to your text window as it runs.
One of your users is looking at the
window and is reviewing the results.
In the meantime,
the application is adding data
to the bottom of your text area.
Well, MLTE is going to scroll.
And that might be a
disconcerting behavior.
So for Tiger, we added some new tags that
you can control the scrolling
behavior the way you like it.
You can have it as it is by default.
You can make MLTE behave like the
terminal in the scrolling behavior,
or you can tell MLTE, don't scroll at all
until I ask you to do so.
As I mentioned before,
if you're using HITextView,
you get accessibility support for free.
However, if you need to continue,
your application needs to
work on back to Panther,
or for whatever other reason,
and you want to continue
to use the MLTE API,
we're providing you an API to add
accessibility support to your text areas.
the TXN save and the TXN read
APIs were showing their age.
They used some old data structures.
On the one hand, on the other hand,
we wanted to add support for RTFD.
We added support for RTF during
the bantered release.
In JAGWARE,
we wanted to extend the support and
be even more compatible with the
Cocoa stack and add RTFD support.
In addition,
some of you have been asking for
APIs that allow them to save and
retrieve information from memory.
So for TIGER,
we added two APIs to read and
write to CFData and two APIs to
read and write from CFURL.
In addition,
there is an auxiliary API that allows you
to decide what is the best file format
that you need to use in order to save
your data without losing any information.
And that is important, for instance,
if you want to decide whether to use
RTF or whether to use RTF or plain text.
Another API that we added, actually,
two APIs,
we added to set and get the event target.
There's been some confusion in
the past of where MLT installed
their Carbon event handlers,
and so -- although I haven't seen
any feedback on that area recently
-- there was an outstanding request
for APIs that allow you to set
and get the target event -- the
target for the Carbon events in MLT,
and those are there in MLT.
We also added better ways for you
to turn on HI command handling,
and I'm going to go in some detail on
the -- about those APIs in a minute.
Two more things.
We added support for spell checking,
and we added support for the font panel.
So now, with very few lines of code,
spell checking is working
in your text area.
And with very few lines of code,
the font panel is also working.
And not only the main font panel,
but the color subpanel,
the character palette,
the typography panel.
And if some of you have tried to do it,
that's quite a fair amount of work.
So we have simplified
that implementation.
All right.
So two words of caution.
One is as Steve mentioned,
we're showing you Tiger soon a
lot earlier than other releases.
So the APIs are there,
the basic implementation is there,
but we're still working on that.
So the second word that I wanna say is,
please give them a try.
We've been implementing them
in response to your request.
We love to hear what you have
to say and whether there are
things that we need to tweak.
So what I want now to do is
a more hands-on approach.
I'm going to show you how to
build an HITex view to show you
that even managers can do it,
and how to actually customize it,
and then I'm going to move
on and give you some tips and
tricks about optimization.
So can I have the demo machine please?
The other demo machine.
Thank you.
So I have Interface Builder running.
So I'm going to create a
Carbon app with the menu,
made with the menu bar.
And just for the purpose of this
demonstration so that you can
see the contrast between the
background and the text area,
I'm going to make it metal.
And now I'm going to drag and drop
from the Carbon palette the text area.
I'm going to resize it.
Oops.
Resize it.
And I'm going to do one more thing.
I'm going to give the TextView a
signature and an ID so that later on
I can retrieve it in my application.
I'm going to give it the signature text,
and the ID is 0.
And I'm ready to go.
So I have an HITextView with
an MLTE object inside it.
And I can type.
Maybe.
I can switch to Japanese and
I can type Japanese,
have written no line of code.
I can bring up WordText and
I can copy and paste.
So, all of that by just dragging
and dropping in a few clicks.
So what, can I have these slides?
Thanks.
So that shows you how to
build your HITextView.
But, and maybe the basic
functionality is all you need.
But say that you need
to add some margins,
you want to retrieve the text,
you want to add some
text programmatically.
Then in that case if you need
to customize your HITextView,
you want to use the MLT APIs.
And if you have been doing so,
that you can transition your creation
of the text area to use HITextView and
then take advantage of all the
other code that you already have.
SO THIS IS MY DETOUR FOR THE FOLKS THAT
ARE NEW TO THIS AREA.
SO LET ME -- I'M
GOING TO GIVE YOU SOME BASICS ABOUT MLT.
IT IS VERY SIMPLE.
MLT REPRESENTS YOUR TEXT AREA,
YOUR DOCUMENT WITH A TXN OBJECT,
WHICH IS AN OPAQUE OBJECT.
IT USES OBJECT-WIDE CONTROLS,
WHICH ARE CALLED OBJECT CONTROLS.
AND MLT USES THE CONCEPT OF STYLE ATTRIB
UTES THAT ARE BY RAND.
SO FOR INSTANCE,
YOU CAN HAVE YOUR TEXT IS DIVIDED IN CHUN
KS.
SO FOR OFFSET 0 TO OFFSET 10,
YOUR TEXT IS LUCIDA POINT SIZE 10 BLUE.
FROM OFFSET 11 TO OFFSET 15
IS HOEFFLER TEXT POINT SIZE 18
GREEN AND SO ON AND SO FORTH.
Now another key concept to MLT is
Carbon Events and I wanted to
say four things about that.
The first one is if you're using an
HITax View MLT is going to install
the Carbon event handlers on the
owning view and it's going to
install all of them at creation time.
Some of them are going to be turned on,
some are not going to
be are going to be off.
But the important point here is
they're all installed at the same time.
The reason why that is important
so you have a good picture of where
in the stack of your Carbon events
MLT has put its own event handlers.
By default we turn on the input the
text input events so that you can type
in using any of the input methods and
the document access events which are
used by the input methods as well.
In addition you can turn on
support for the HI commands
whether it's for your edit menu,
for spell checking on the
font or for the font panel.
But those are off by default
and you can turn it on later.
So that ends my detour.
Now remember we had our HITax
View and I'm going to show you
how to extract the MLT object.
So here it is.
First of all we have a constant
that allows us to identify that
particular view in our hierarchy.
After that,
I'm going to call some standard
high-level toolbox APIs to find the
root of the hierarchy and extract the
particular view that I'm interested in,
in this case, the HITextView.
And once I have the HITextView,
I can call hiTextView getTxnObject,
and that gives me the MLTE object.
Now, I'm good to go.
All right.
So to show you how to use the MLTE APIs,
I'm going to--
Demonstrate how you can
turn on spell checking.
And it's going to be very simple.
An MLT leverages the HICommand
support that we added for
Tiger to turn on spell checking.
So let me remind you
what are the HICommands.
So we have two flavors of HICommands.
HICommand process events,
which are the events that are
sent when your user clicks on
a menu item or selects a menu
item or clicks on a control.
And then there are the
HIUpdate status events,
which are the events that are
dispatched to your application
when a UI element needs updating.
For instance, before your menu comes up,
you get one of those events so that you
have a chance to update the information
in the look of the items in your menu.
We recommend that you handle all
of the HI commands for the menu,
or none of them, to avoid compatibility
issues in the future.
And that's actually the
way we did it for MLTE.
So for Tiger, we are introducing the
TXN SetCommand event support,
which allows you to turn on
and off support for basically
three groups of HI commands:
for editing, for style checking,
and for the font panel.
And those three flavors work for
processing and update status.
I'm not going to go through the
details that you see on the table,
but suffice it to say that you have
three options that you can turn on,
and those enable the handling
of the HI commands in MLTE.
So for instance,
if you decide that you want
MLTE to handle the edit
command processing events,
MLTE will do so,
and it will handle the undo, redo,
select all, and so on.
Now, how do we turn spell checking on?
Very simple.
We set the options for the
HRI commands that we want,
the spell checking in this case,
and then we call
txnSetCommandEventSupport with the
MLTE object and the options that we set.
And that's it.
From that point on,
spell checking is going to work.
Now, what is it going to--what is it that
you're going to see in your application
when you turn spell checking on?
So if you have misspells,
they're going to show up
as red dotted underlines.
In addition,
we provide a contextual support
for the contextual menu,
and we added some APIs so that
you can modify the content of that
contextual menu if you choose to.
So MLTE is going to handle
the contextual menu,
but we're going to give you a
choice to modify it as you need.
And also, we provide support for
the spelling panel.
So if the HRI command for
the spelling panel is sent,
MLTE will react to that and show
the spelling panel so that your
users can select the dictionary,
learn a new word, spelling, and so on.
If that looks familiar to you,
that is because we implemented
the same UI as Cocoa.
So we were talking about the
consistency between Carbon and Cocoa,
and we wanted to, you know, enrich that.
So the UI is exactly the same.
You use the same spell checking
engine and the same set of
to be able to dictionize.
All right.
So with that, I showed you how to
create your HITextView,
how to extract the MLTE object,
how to customize it.
Now,
as important as that to use the APIs,
it's important also that
you use them correctly.
And I'm going to give you some tips that
we learned over the recent months by
working with developers and analyzing
the performance of their application.
So the first one is,
There are cases in which you
don't need all of the rich
style text that MLT supports.
What you really need is mono style text.
In that case we recommend you
use KTXN mono style text mask
when you create your object.
That allows us to optimize the break
line operations because the height,
the height of the text is constant.
For Tiger we introduced the
KTXN disable layout and draw tag,
which is useful when you
do multiple sequential
modifications to your MLT object.
So basically what you want to do
is you want to set the mask on,
modify your object, turn it off and draw.
And that way MLT will not draw and
break lines in between operations.
That is the same behavior
as the KTXN visibility tag.
But the name was really confusing so
we decided to introduce a tag that
has a name for what it really does.
If your text ends with carriage returns
then you want to use the KTXN word
wrap state tag and set it to not wrap.
That way we can avoid doing
unnecessary line breaks,
which could be an expensive operation
in the case of Unicode and text.
As important as the do tips are
the things that you should not do.
The model in MLT and HA TextView is
that MLT reacts to changes
to the object by redrawing.
So in most cases you do
not need to call TXN draw.
One exception is if you use the
TXN disable layout and draw tag after
you re-enable layout and draw tag.
You want to call TXN draw.
And that is because that was
implemented a long time ago that
way and we didn't want to change
it to avoid performance impact.
Also, unless you really do need it,
do not use the
KTXN Always Rapid View Edge mask.
What that mask does is keeps your
destination rectangle of your text
pinned to the view rect of your window.
So as you resize your window, your text,
we're crazily breaking lines
and redrawing your text.
And that, sometimes,
is not the behavior you want.
So keep an eye on that.
If you need it, feel free to use it.
We improved the performance
of that operation quite a bit.
But if you didn't need it, don't set it.
All right.
And with that, I'm going to give you a
quick demo of the KTXN.
The new APIs working on Tiger.
Let me clean up.
So what I have here is MLTE Showcase.
That's an application
that we put together.
One of the engineers in
the team wrote for WWDC.
You have it in your SDK.
Feel free to play with
it and give us feedback.
So what you see is the large text area
is an HITextView with an MLTE object.
The small text area on top
of that is a Unicode control,
and we put some radio buttons to control
the behavior because one of the feedbacks
that we heard is that you want to be
able to manage the behavior of your
text objects from any kinds of controls,
not only from menus.
So the first thing I'm going to do is
I'm going to turn on spell checking,
and I am going to start typing.
And I have practiced this so well
that I cannot make a typing mistake.
There you are.
So as I type,
the red dotted underline comes up,
and all of the lines, of course,
are the code that have been executed
as the one that I showed you.
We don't have contextual menus still
working yet in this application,
but it will be there soon.
And there it is.
Okay, let me move on to the font panel.
And I'm going to select this paragraph.
I'm going to change the font.
[Transcript missing]
As you see,
I have all of the different options for
changing the style from the font panel,
working with MLTE objects.
I can even bring up the color
palette and change the color.
I can
Strike through?
I can underline.
So all of the different
palettes just work.
And again, this is by turning off the
HI command event support in MLTE.
We have here a way to show
you how the undo groups work,
but I'm not going to have
time to go into that.
And so let me just show you
the no scrolling in action.
So let me copy, copy.
All right.
Never mind.
As I said, this is work in progress.
Let me copy the text,
and let me put my instruction
point at the bottom.
And now I'm going to paste it.
And as you see, as I paste the text,
MLT is going to scroll.
So now I'm going to turn no scrolling.
And I'm going to start pasting.
Nothing happens.
As you see,
the scroll bar is getting smaller,
because the size of my
text object is increasing.
And actually, the text is being pasted at
the bottom of the object.
But there is no scrolling, actually.
Next to Write Your Buttons is
going to show you how to use
reading and writing to a CFURL.
And you can take a look at that and,
again, give us feedback.
And with that,
I'm going to end up the MLT session.
And I'm going to turn the
presentation to Tom Madden.
Thank you.
How's everybody doing?
Good conference?
So my name's Tom Madden.
I'm an engineer.
And I've been working at
SUI for a little while now.
Well, let's get started.
ATSUI is an acronym.
It stands for Apple Type Services for
Unicode Imaging.
Today I'm going to cover kind of
what it is and why you should use it.
I'm going to cover some
basic ATSUI constructs,
some things you would need to
know to get started using ATSUI.
I'm going to cover how
to do some line breaking,
drawing.
Then I'm going to cover
some advanced features,
and I'm going to give you some
performance tips for those of
you who are considering using
ATSUI or have already adopted it.
So without further ado, what is ATSUI?
Well, ATSUI is the low-level
Unicode layout engine.
ATSUI is used by all those things that
Giulia just showed to actually take
the Unicode text that's used as an
input and display it on the screen.
ATSUI provides layout
services for all those things,
plus it provides some
services for AppKit.
It provides services for Safari and
a whole bunch of other apps.
So you might be asking yourself,
what is layout?
We've been using the word
"layout" the whole presentation.
Some of you may or may
not know what it is.
Well, layout is simply the process
of taking the Unicode text and
converting it to glyphs and positions,
which get then fed into the
Quartz rendering engine.
The glyphs and the positions
are determined by two things.
First of all, the layout tables that
are embedded in the font.
atsui supports OpenType
font layout tables,
which are the gpos and the gsub table,
as well as the aatfont layout tables.
It's always supported those.
In addition to the layout tables,
it also requires character properties.
Unicode has a great character properties
database where it can find all sorts
of information about the characters.
So it takes those two bits of data,
munches them together,
and out come the glyphs
and the positions.
Besides the standard
character to glyph mapping,
reordering and stuff like that
that's required by layout,
Atsui also does a couple other things.
The first is automatic font substitution.
Automatic font substitution allows
Atsui to substitute a new font should
the font that you have selected
not be able to map the characters
that the user has input into Atsui.
So for instance,
let's say you have selected
Times New Roman and then the
user has input a Japanese text.
Times New Roman can't display Japanese,
so ATSUI will go out and
substitute a new font for it,
most likely Hiragino.
Additionally,
ATSUI provides API for style management.
There's an ATSUI style object,
which I'll get into in a minute.
It provides API for line breaking,
which can be pretty tricky
in the case of Unicode.
And it also provides API to help
you if you had an editable document.
So you've seen all the
stuff that Julia has.
You've seen the MLTE.
You've seen the HITextView.
You might be asking yourself,
why should you use ATSUI directly?
Well, if you need the ultimate
control over the text,
you would use ATSUI.
With ATSUI,
you can control the line breaks.
You can control the exact
position of the text.
You can even go into the glyphs and
change their positions directly.
In addition, ATSUI provides broader
options for tracking,
justification, kerning, flushness,
and all this other stuff that
you may want to control directly.
In addition,
if you have custom rendering paths,
such as you want to go out to, say,
an OpenGL context or something like that,
you may want to use ATSUI as well.
What ATSUI will also get you,
switching to ATSUI directly, is speed.
In a sense,
those APIs that Julia mentioned and a
lot of the other APIs in the system,
their whole purpose is to feed
ATSUI Unicode text and to manage
the ATSUI objects for you.
But if you can do a
better job at doing that,
then you will get faster operations,
because these objects, in some cases,
were designed for a more general case.
So you've decided, OK,
I need to use ATSUI.
So what do you need to
know to get started?
Well, the first is you need
to know about Unicode.
The Unicode text buffer that you provide
to ATSUI must be in the UTF-16 format.
ATSUI doesn't accept UTF-8,
doesn't accept UTF-32,
only accepts UTF-16.
You can get your text in the
UTF-16 format using CFString or
Text Encoding Converter,
whatever.
It just has to be in UTF-16 format.
The second thing that's very important
is that you own the text buffer.
You can't free the text
buffer out from ATSUI.
If you do that, bad things will happen.
ATSUI does not retain the text buffer.
ATSUI doesn't do anything like that.
You manage it.
You own it.
And likewise, if you should change any of
the text in that text buffer,
you have to notify ATSUI.
So if you insert text, delete text,
move the buffer around,
you have to call an API,
which I'll show you in a minute.
Finally,
one important note that has tripped
up more than one person is that
the character to glyph mapping
is not necessarily one-to-one,
even in the case of simple
ASCII English/Roman text.
So, one of the most blatant
examples is the FI ligature.
You have an F character
and an I character,
which combine to form a single glyph.
And so if your code makes
assumptions that there will be
one character for one glyph,
it will break in a lot of cases.
So you have your Unicode Text Buffer.
It's in UTF-16.
It's ready to go.
You want to do something with it.
So what do you do with it?
The first thing you have to
do is tell ATSUI where it is.
And you do that by creating
an ATSU Text Layout.
The ATSU Text Layout is simply an object
that references your Unicode Text Buffer.
Inside that ATSUI Text Layout,
it also tracks the style assignments.
So you take a range of that buffer
and you assign it to Helvetica,
you assign it to Times,
you assign it to different
fonts or different styles.
It also tracks the line breaks,
it tracks the font fallbacks,
which allow you to customize
that font substitution behavior
that I talked about earlier.
And it also tracks the tab
rulers and the tab stops.
You modify this Hatsutext layout by
setting layout and line controls on it,
and there's a couple APIs that
allow you to do that.
And finally,
and perhaps most importantly,
the Hatsutext layout will store
the cached lines of glyphs.
And so if you're constantly creating
these things and throwing them out,
you're going to get rid of a lot of work,
and your application will run slower,
because that whole layout process
that I had that graphic up there for,
that can be an expensive process,
because it has to read in font
tables and interpret the characters.
If you throw that work out
and have to recreate it,
your application is doing
a lot of extra work.
So to create an ATSU text layout,
it's pretty simple.
We have an API called
ATSU Create Text Layout.
You just call ATSU Create Text Layout,
and you have a layout.
It's empty.
It doesn't do anything yet.
So you have to assign some text to it.
We have an API called
ATSU Set Text Pointer Location.
You call that to set-- you
could assign the buffer to it.
And then finally,
we always recommend that you call
ATSU Set Transient Font Matching.
This will turn on the font
substitution behavior,
as I described before.
It's off by default.
If you don't turn this on,
what will happen is,
if you should encounter some
text that your currently
selected font can't render,
you'll get ugly little boxes,
and that's not pretty.
So you have your ATSU text layout,
it's kind of boring.
It doesn't really do anything yet.
In fact, if you try and pass it to a
draw API or a measurement API,
you'll get an error because it
doesn't know what to do yet.
So to make it much more useful,
you have to assign a font to it.
You have to assign some style to it.
And so you do that with
the ATSU style object,
which is simply a collection
of the stylistic attributes.
It's the font, the color, the point size,
all this stuff that you want to
kind of stylize the text with.
You take that ATSU style and
you assign it to a range of text
within that ATSU text layout.
Now an important point is that once
it's assigned to an ATSU text layout,
you can go ahead and assign it to as
many other ATSU text layouts as you want.
It's not tied to any
specific text layout.
You can reuse it over and over again.
In fact, that's recommended because
you'll be creating fewer objects.
So to create an ATSU text style,
the first thing you do is
you call @SU_CREATE_STYLE.
and that creates a blank style.
It's set up with all the defaults.
In fact, you can use it right away.
It's just maybe not what you want.
I think it's set up with Helvetica,
12-point, and a couple other defaults.
So to get it into a shape that you
would want to be able to use it in,
you have to set some attributes to it.
Here I'm setting the font tag,
which will set a font,
a specific font to that style,
and a size tag, which will set a specific
size to that style.
Once I have the tag set up,
I call atsu set attributes
with the tags and the values,
and that will set everything up,
and it'll be ready to go.
So once you have your ATSUI style set up,
you assign it to the text layout
to arrange in the text layout
using ATSUI's set run style.
So your text layout is all ready to go.
You have the style set,
you have all the text in it,
but there's one problem.
It's all one line.
And so for some folks that may be OK,
but if you have an application that
requires line wrapping or line breaking,
you need to call Atsui to do
the line breaking for you.
Atsui has two line breaking APIs.
One is called Atsui Batch Breaklines,
and that's an API that is optimized
for breaking constant width lines.
And so for instance,
if you were breaking inside a
rectangle or if you were breaking
down a constant width barrier,
you could use Atsui Batch Breaklines.
Atsui Breakline could be used
for the situation pictured above,
where you would want
to vary the line width.
In this case,
we're trying to wrap around an object,
so the line widths on this
side are a little shorter
than the line widths below.
So, ATSUI Batch Breaklines sets
multiple breaklines at once,
and it requires that you
have a constant width,
and so if you're breaking into a box.
Atsu batch breaklines is used simple.
The first thing we recommend is that
you set the width in the object.
You can specify a width to
the batch breaklines API,
but the problem is that width
is only used for line breaking.
So if you go and apply a flushness
or a centering or some other
"If you have an API that
requires a width,
that width won't apply.
So you would need to go
and set the width anyway.
So we recommend you just do it before.
So you do @susetlayoutcontrols
with that width,
and then you simply
call @subatchbreaklines,
and it'll go down and set all the line
breaks to that width you've specified."
If you need to do
non-constant width breaking,
if you need to vary the line width,
if you need to do other things like that,
we have the ATSUI Breakline API,
and that will let you set the
width for every operation.
An important thing here is
to let ATSUI set the line
break once it's found it.
ATSU break line can be used in a mode
where it can just find the break for you,
which may be what you want.
But it's recommended that you let
ATSUI set the break once it's found it,
and you do that by
passing in a parameter,
which I'll show you in a minute.
This is important because if you
don't let ATSUI set the break,
it will have to go back and re-figure
out that break when you go and set it.
So you'll throw out a little bit of work.
So this code up here does the
same exact code as the batch break
lines example that I showed you.
It just uses the break line API.
So like before, the first thing you do is
you set the line width.
In this case,
we're using a constant width.
The next thing you'll probably want to
do is get the character count so you
know where to stop breaking the lines.
You set the break to
start at the beginning.
Then you call atsu break line in a loop
until it's consumed all the characters.
So the next thing you'll
probably want to do is,
now that you have your
nice ATSUI text layout,
you have all the lines broken,
you have all the styles assigned,
is that you'll probably want to draw it.
AtSUI has a function called @SUDrawText,
and the important point here
is it draws one line at a time.
So you'll have to draw
those lines individually.
You should always specify a CG context,
and you do that via a text or a line
layout option or a line or a text
layout option in the ATSUI text layout.
You do ATSUI set layout
attributes with the CG context,
and then it'll be set in the text layout.
The reason why you do that,
because if you don't set a text layout,
ATSUI has a quick draw fallback mode.
And so if you don't set a CG context,
it'll have to go through and
look up a CG context for you
from the current quick draw port,
which is a very expensive operation.
So if you set that CG context beforehand,
you'll avoid all that work.
Another important thing to remember
when you draw text is that you
need to flush the CG context.
If you don't flush the CG context,
you probably won't see anything.
"But you should only flush it once.
And so if you're drawing a
whole paragraph worth of text,
you want to flush it after
you've drawn all the lines."
So some of you have needs.
You're writing a text editor,
you're writing an application
that has editable text.
You'll need to use some editing APIs.
ATSUI has hit testing
and cursor handling APIs.
I'm not going to go through those.
We have highlighting APIs to handle the
highlighting and unhighlighting of text.
And these are kind of useful
because in Unicode text,
the highlighted areas can be
discontinuous depending on the
directionality and such of the text.
In addition, we have three APIs that will
be required should you ever
insert or delete or move text,
and they're listed up
there on the screen.
Some advanced features that
ATSUI has that you may be interested
in is we have the ATSU Glyph
Selector to specify a glyph variant.
You specify this ATSU Glyph
Selector in the style,
and that allows you to do the glyph
variant support that Giulia showed
you that MLTE handles for you.
ATSUI also has the
ATSU Direct Access calls,
and these allow you to get exact
glyphs and glyph positions and all
sorts of other information out of the
layout for those of you who want to
do your own positional manipulations
or supply your own metrics.
ATSUI also has some flattening
APIs for pasteboard exports.
This will allow you to
take the ATSUI styles that
you've set in the layout,
flatten them all to a binary format
so you can put them all up on the
pasteboard or save them to disk.
And finally,
ATSUI has some curve access APIs.
And these are really cool because
they allow you to get at the
curves that ATSUI is giving to the
graphics engine to draw the glyphs.
So some applications, such as Motion,
have used these.
"I'm going to show you how to
actually do animated text and other
cool effects with those curves."
So some folks have asked
for some performance tips,
besides some of the ones that have
been given throughout the presentation.
You should use the ATSU Git Glyph
Bounds API for measuring
the text whenever possible.
ATSUI provides several
APIs for measurement,
and this is the only one
that's guaranteed not to
upset any of the cached data.
Some of the APIs require it to
do some extra processing work
to get the correct measurement,
the measurement that you requested for.
This will give you a typographic
bounds that's guaranteed to
not upset the cached layout.
Second thing,
if you are getting the curves,
you should call atsu.getNativeCurveType
before accessing the curves
and set up your curve callbacks
according to the result of that.
Some fonts have curves stored in cubics.
Some fonts have curves
stored in quadratics.
And if you use the wrong type,
ATSUI has to convert the cubes
to quads and the quads to cubes.
And that's not an expensive process
and may give you some ugly looking
text if you go to draw those curves.
Finally,
if there's anything that you should take
away from in terms of ATSUI performance,
is that you should maximize
the object lifetimes,
meaning that you should not
throw away these objects until
you're absolutely done with them.
Keep the text layout objects around.
Keep the ATSU style objects around.
Following that,
you want to minimize the object creation.
You want to create as few
ATSUI styles as possible,
and you want to create as few ATSUI text
layouts as your application requires.
So that wraps up the
ATSUI section of the session.
And there's a couple things
that you should take away.
First is that you should use the
HIThemeText API for static text.
It makes things a lot easier.
You can create these
things in Project Builder.
Second, use the Unicode Control API.
So that wraps up the
ATSUI section of the session.
And there's a couple things
that you should take away.
First is that you should use the
HIThemeText API for static text.
It makes things a lot easier.
You can create these
things in Project Builder.
Second, use the Unicode Control API.
Fifth, use the API optimally
for the best performance.
That includes keeping objects around,
not throwing them out,
creating as few objects as possible,
turning off visibility on your
MLTE objects when you're doing
lots of edits and stuff like that.
And finally, you need to file bug reports
should you see anything wrong.
We're doing our best
to test these things,
but every now and then,
Well, I shouldn't say every now and then,
but we get very good bug reports
from you guys from the field,
and we do fix those,
and we do see those problems.
So with that,
I'd like to bring up Xavier for
the wrap-up and the Q&A.
Thank you.